Subject: [PATCH v4 0/4] drm/nouveau: channel-kill event ordering fixes, and lower the gate to NV50

This is v4. v3 is here:

  https://lore.kernel.org/all/20260812231330.705425-1-mczernohous@gmail.com/

Thank you for the review. Changes since v3:

1/4 unchanged, and now carries Lyude's Reviewed-by.

2/4 rewritten. v3 moved the subscription behind context_new(), which traded
    a half-built fence context for a missed kill. Lyude pointed out that the
    subscription does not have to move at all: give the fence context a flag
    and have the two sides hand the kill over. That is what this version
    does, and it is the better fix, because the kill is no longer lost.

3/4 restructured as requested: the debug line keeps the channel name, the
    channel lookup and release moved out of the inner conditional so both
    branches have it, and the format arguments are in local variables. The
    debug line also says "(benign)" now, so the two format strings are not
    identical.

4/4 unchanged in code. Lyude asked what testing this has had on Tesla and
    said it will need input from others; the testing question is answered
    under Testing below. It is last in the series so it can be dropped
    without disturbing the two fixes, and I am happy for it to wait for
    that input rather than go with them.

On 2/4, and the two places where it differs from the sketch

  Both differences follow from the same detail, and I want to state them
  openly rather than let them be found in the diff.

  The sketch checks chan->killed before setting ->ready. Both sides of a
  handover like this have to store their own flag before they load the
  other's, or one interleaving loses the kill: arm() reads killed == 0,
  kill() sets killed and reads ready == false, arm() then sets ready, and
  neither side calls nouveau_fence_context_kill(). That outcome is reachable
  under sequential consistency, so it is not a barrier problem: no barrier
  can forbid it, because barriers order accesses and do not reorder them.
  The two accesses have to be the other way round in program order. Swapped,
  and with an smp_mb() on each side, this is exactly
  tools/memory-model/litmus-tests/SB+fencembonceonces.litmus.

  The sketch also holds fctx->lock across the handover. The kill side cannot
  join that lock, because reaching fctx->lock is the thing this patch has to
  avoid until the context is built: chan->fence is published by the
  allocation, before nouveau_fence_context_new() calls spin_lock_init(). So
  ->ready is read outside the lock. That also answers the open question at
  the end of the sketch: it does not have to be atomic_t, a bool is enough,
  but it does have to be published with release and read with acquire, so
  that a caller which sees it set also sees the initialised lock and list.

  The idea is Lyude's and the patch says so. I would rather be told I have
  the memory model wrong than quietly ship a handshake that drops kills.

  On the last line of that review

  The advice is right, and I would rather say so than let it pass. The
  honest position, though, is that I doubt I would have got to these bugs
  at all without the assistance, and not only because the machine I am
  debugging is the machine that freezes under me: I do not yet know this
  codebase well enough. What I do is check the code and the reasoning for
  plausibility and run it on the hardware.

Testing

  Reference hardware: Apple Mac mini Late 2009, MCP79 / GeForce 9400M
  (NVAC), Core 2 Duo, Wayland (labwc).

  Build. Built against the stated base commit c21bb4193868. The nouveau
  module compiles and links with W=1 and no new warnings. checkpatch.pl
  --strict is clean on all four patches.

  Deliberate channel kills on Tesla, which is Lyude's question on 4/4.

  The kill path on this hardware has been exercised on purpose, not only
  observed, and under a real 3D workload. A local debug patch, which is not
  part of this series, synthesises a CACHE_ERROR on a nominated channel.
  The victim was SuperTuxKart, mid-race:

    fifo: inject:   ch 2 [labwc]  ch 3 [labwc]  ch 4 [Xwayland]
                    ch 5 [supertuxkart]
    fifo: ch 5 fault 1/3 in 10000ms window, skipping method and resuming
    fifo: ch 5 fault 2/3 in 10000ms window, skipping method and resuming
    fifo:000000:0005:0005:[supertuxkart] errored - disabling channel
    nouveau 0000:02:00.0: channel 5 killed!
    supertuxkart: segfault ... in libgallium

  So on NVAC, with 4/4 in place, the ERRORED event is delivered, the handler
  runs, and the fence context is killed.

  The compositor survived it. labwc kept the same pid across the kill and so
  did Xwayland, only the victim died, and the desktop stayed usable. That
  answer needed a second attempt: this tree carries a local watchdog that
  terminates the compositor on any channel kill, which hid the result until
  I took it out of the way for the test.

  Two limits on what that proves. The escalation that disabled the channel
  is local and not in this series; what this series contributes is that the
  event reaches a subscriber at all instead of being dropped into an empty
  notifier list. And the victim did not survive its own channel being
  killed: it segfaulted inside Mesa rather than handling the -ENODEV fences.
  Without the subscription it would have hung instead. I think a fault the
  application can see beats a hang it cannot, but that is a judgement, and
  it is the kind of thing worth disagreeing with.

  Games and sustained 3D. glxgears without vsync for ten minutes, and
  SuperTuxKart for a full race, ten and a half minutes, both with 4/4 in
  place. Across both the kernel emitted nothing at all beyond the known
  benign gr DATA_ERROR trap at window creation: three instances for the
  race, none during it. No wedge, no unexpected kill, no CACHE_ERROR at
  error level, and the session came through both unchanged.

  Soak. Code equivalent to 1/4, 3/4 and 4/4 has been running on this machine
  since 2026-07-25, across the kernel bumps 7.1.5 through 7.1.8, with no
  regression.

  The 2/4 in this posting has NOT been soaked. What has been running since
  2026-08-06 is the v3 form of it, which moved the subscription; the
  handover in this version is new as of today. I will report back once it
  has run, and I would rather say this than let the v3 sentence stand.

  What the soak does not show, stated plainly: that tree carries local
  patches this series does not, including a cap on the plane-fence wait in
  the nonblocking commit tail. So the soak says these changes do not
  misbehave in daily use. It is not an independent demonstration of the
  failure modes above.

  1/4 and 2/4 are ordering fixes for windows I have not managed to hit
  deliberately; the reasoning is from the source.

  3/4 filters a benign CACHE_ERROR that Mesa's NV50 bind probe triggers. The
  logs behind it are from a second, independent MCP79/MCP7A machine, not
  mine: 99 occurrences across three logs and two kernel versions, under Xorg
  and Wayland. They were shared with me by the tester who reported the
  original NVAC issue. I have added no Reported-by or Tested-by because we
  have not been in touch since and I have nobody's consent to point at.
